ReadMe.md, before:

# What is This Repository?

This repository provides a [Dockerfile](Dockerfile_GazLIO) that installs [Gazebo](https://gazebosim.org/home) and a slightly modified version of [FastLIO](https://github.com/hku-mars/FAST_LIO), a state-of-the-art Lidar-Inertial Odometry (LIO) system. The simulation environment in Gazebo includes a ground vehicle equipped with a LiDAR, IMU, and a stereo camera pair.

You can control the vehicle using a joystick, while FastLIO simultaneously processes IMU and LiDAR measurements and visualizes the estimated trajectory with map in real-time.

<div align="center">
  <img src="Visualization/GazLIO.gif" alt="Visualization of the Overall System" width="80%">
</div>

You can watch the [full video](https://youtu.be/AwSmk49Mt2I)

# Building the Docker Image

First, build the docker file. This will dowload and install all the necessary libraries and tools to a docker image including Gazebo simulator and Fast LIO.
```bash
cd GazLIO
docker build -t gaz_lio -f Dockerfile_GazLIO .
```

# Running The System

The overall system is composed of 3 subsystems
- Simulator: Clearpath
- Controller: Joystick
- State Estimator: FastLIO


### Terminator
Each subsytem should be able to communicate with each other. **Terminator** is a useful terminal which enables us to connect each subsytem through ROS.

### Start the docker image
First initialize the docker image
```bash
cd ..
bash GazLIO_runner.bash
```

This will automatically start the **terminator**.

- **Left-click on the Terminator window**. Then press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>E</kbd> or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>O</kbd> to split the terminal horizontally or vertically. Each split terminal can be used to interact with ROS. **Create as many terminal panels as needed.**
- You can change the real time factor of the simulation from `GazLIO_runner.bash`
    ```
    sed -i 's|<real_time_factor>[^<]*</real_time_factor>|<real_time_factor>0.2</real_time_factor>|' /opt/ros/humble/share/clearpath_gz/worlds/warehouse.sdf
    ```

### All Steps at a Glance
Follow these steps to run the full system. For detailed instructions, refer to the upcoming sections.
```bash
# In one of the terminator terminals, start the simulator
ros2 launch clearpath_gz simulation.launch.py world:=warehouse

# In one of the terminator terminals, start the joystick driver
ros2 run joy joy_node

# In one of the terminator terminals, start the joystick interpreter
cd /root/joystick
source install/setup.bash
ros2 run joy2twist joy2twist --ros-args --remap /cmd_vel:=/ground_vehicle/platform/cmd_vel

# Once the simulator is ready, start FastLIO in one of the terminator terminals.
ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=gazebo.yaml
```
### Step by Step Explanations
#### Start Simulator
To launch the simulator, copy and paste the following script into one of the terminator terminals:
```bash
ros2 launch clearpath_gz simulation.launch.py world:=warehouse
```
**Note:** Currently, the other worlds are **not supported**. Only the warehouse is available. 
- warehouse
- office
- pipeline
- orchard

#### Start Joystick Control
Joystick control enable us to drive the vehicle from a joystick. In another terminator terminal, run the following command to start the joystick driver:
```bash
ros2 run joy joy_node
```

Next, we need to convert the joystick outputs into a format that Gazebo expects. This is done using a dedicated package.

Finally, run the following commands:

```bash
cd /root/joystick
source install/setup.bash
ros2 run joy2twist joy2twist --ros-args --remap /cmd_vel:=/cmd_vel:=/ground_vehicle/platform/cmd_vel
```

Once this is done, you can use the joystick to drive the vehicle in the simulator.

The button mapping shown below is adapted from the [joy2twist Github page](https://github.com/husarion/joy2twist.git). For more information and detailed documentation, please refer to the original [joy2twist Github page](https://github.com/husarion/joy2twist.git).
<div align="center">
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/husarion/joy2twist/ros2/.docs/gamepad-legend-panther.png" alt="JoyStick Controller" width="75%">
</div>

**Warning:** If the vehicle does not respond to joystick inputs, try closing and reopening the simulator. To further troubleshoot motion control, check the `/w200_0000/cmd_vel` topic to verify whether the joystick is publishing velocity commands.
```bash
ros2 topic echo /w200_0000/cmd_vel
```


#### Start Fast LIO
Before starting the FastLIO, wait untill the simulator is ready. Once the simulator is ready, use the following command:
```bash
ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=gazebo.yaml
```

# Data Collection for Offline Examiantion
You can collect data for offline examination. For example, you may wish to record the following data streams for later analysis:
- IMU data
- Lidar Data
- Left and right camera frames

To start recording the data, use the following command:
```bash
ros2 bag record /ground_vehicle/sensors/imu_1/data /ground_vehicle/sensors/lidar3d_0/points /ground_vehicle/sensors/camera_0/color/image /ground_vehicle/sensors/camera_1/color/image -o _warehouse
```
This will create a ros2 bag file. 

Unfortunately, the groundtruth pose is not published through ROS. However, it is published through gazebo. You can save the groundtruth pose using gazebo.
```bash
gz topic -e -t /model/ground_vehicle/robot/pose > groundtruth.txt
```

### Decreasing Simulation Real Time Factor for Efficient Data Collection
If you plan to collect large amounts of data, it is recommended to decrease the simulation time rate. Without adjusting the time rate, data will continue to accumulate at a fast rate, potentially causing issues with saving or processing the data effectively.

To adjust the simulation time flow, follow these steps:
1.  Navigate to the world SDF file:
    ```bash
    cd /opt/ros/humble/share/clearpath_gz/worlds/
    nano warehouse.sdf
    ```
2. Modify the **real_time_factor**
    ```xml
    <sdf version='1.7'>
    <world name='warehouse'>
        <physics type="ode">
        <max_step_size>0.003</max_step_size>
        <real_time_factor>1.01</real_time_factor>
    ```
3. Save and close. Then, restart the simulator to apply the changes.


# Additional Notes
## Testing FastLIO with Ros2 Bag

### HKU Dataset
Dowload the HKU ros2 bag from [google drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/16IUNQagundFwNg3uJFNCSdyLr9VdAxVp?usp=sharing)

1. First initialize the docker image
    ```bash
    bash GazLIO_runner.bash
    ```
2. Split the terminator terminal into 2 (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>E</kbd>).

3. In one terminator window, start FastLIO
    ```
    ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=avia.yaml
    ```

4. Run the ros2 bag from another terminal
    ```bash
    cd /PATH/TO/datasets
    ros2 bag run HKU_MB
    ```


### Clearpath Simulated Data
Dowload the simulation ros2 bags from [google drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/16IUNQagundFwNg3uJFNCSdyLr9VdAxVp?usp=sharing)

1. First initialize the docker image
    ```bash
    bash GazLIO_runner.bash
    ```

2. Split the terminator terminal into 2 (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>E</kbd>).

3. In one terminator window, start FastLIO
    ```bash
    ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=gazebo.yaml
    ```

4. Run the ros2 bag from another terminal
    ```bash
    cd /PATH/TO/datasets
    ros2 bag run warehouse
    ```

Commit message:

Switched from ROS2 Humble to ROS2 Jazzy

ReadMe.md, after:

# What is This Repository?

This repository provides a [Dockerfile](Dockerfile_GazLIO) that installs [Gazebo](https://gazebosim.org/home) and a slightly modified version of [FastLIO](https://github.com/hku-mars/FAST_LIO), a state-of-the-art Lidar-Inertial Odometry (LIO) system. The simulation environment in Gazebo includes a ground vehicle equipped with a LiDAR, IMU, and a stereo camera pair.

You can control the vehicle using a joystick, while FastLIO simultaneously processes IMU and LiDAR measurements and visualizes the estimated trajectory with map in real-time.

<div align="center">
  <img src="Visualization/GazLIO.gif" alt="Visualization of the Overall System" width="80%">
</div>

You can watch the [full video](https://youtu.be/AwSmk49Mt2I)

# Building the Docker Image

First, build the docker file. This will dowload and install all the necessary libraries and tools to a docker image including Gazebo simulator and Fast LIO.
```bash
cd GazLIO
docker build -t gaz_lio -f Dockerfile_GazLIO .
```

# Running The System

The overall system is composed of 3 subsystems
- Simulator: Clearpath
- Controller: Joystick
- State Estimator: FastLIO


### Terminator
Each subsytem should be able to communicate with each other. **Terminator** is a useful terminal which enables us to connect each subsytem through ROS.

### Start the docker image
First initialize the docker image
```bash
cd ..
bash GazLIO_runner.bash
```

This will automatically start the **terminator**.

- **Left-click on the Terminator window**. Then press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>E</kbd> or <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>O</kbd> to split the terminal horizontally or vertically. Each split terminal can be used to interact with ROS. **Create as many terminal panels as needed.**
- You can change the real time factor of the simulation from `GazLIO_runner.bash`
    ```
    sed -i 's|<real_time_factor>[^<]*</real_time_factor>|<real_time_factor>0.2</real_time_factor>|' /opt/ros/humble/share/clearpath_gz/worlds/warehouse.sdf
    ```

### All Steps at a Glance
Follow these steps to run the full system. For detailed instructions, refer to the upcoming sections.
```bash
# In one of the terminator terminals, start the simulator
ros2 launch clearpath_gz simulation.launch.py world:=warehouse

# In one of the terminator terminals, start the joystick driver
ros2 run joy joy_node

# In one of the terminator terminals, start the joystick interpreter
cd /root/joystick
source install/setup.bash
ros2 run joy2twist joy2twist --ros-args --remap /cmd_vel:=/ground_vehicle/platform/cmd_vel

# Once the simulator is ready, start FastLIO in one of the terminator terminals.
ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=gazebo.yaml
```
### Step by Step Explanations
#### Start Simulator
To launch the simulator, copy and paste the following script into one of the terminator terminals:
```bash
ros2 launch clearpath_gz simulation.launch.py world:=warehouse
```
**Note:** Currently, the other worlds are **not supported**. Only the warehouse is available. 
- warehouse
- office
- pipeline
- orchard

#### Start Joystick Control
Joystick control enable us to drive the vehicle from a joystick. In another terminator terminal, run the following command to start the joystick driver:
```bash
ros2 run joy joy_node
```

Next, we need to convert the joystick outputs into a format that Gazebo expects. This is done using a dedicated package.

Finally, run the following commands:

```bash
cd /root/joystick
source install/setup.bash
ros2 run joy2twist joy2twist --ros-args --remap /cmd_vel:=/cmd_vel:=/ground_vehicle/platform/cmd_vel
```

Once this is done, you can use the joystick to drive the vehicle in the simulator.

The button mapping shown below is adapted from the [joy2twist Github page](https://github.com/husarion/joy2twist.git). For more information and detailed documentation, please refer to the original [joy2twist Github page](https://github.com/husarion/joy2twist.git).
<div align="center">
  <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/husarion/joy2twist/ros2/.docs/gamepad-legend-panther.png" alt="JoyStick Controller" width="75%">
</div>

**Warning:** If the vehicle does not respond to joystick inputs, try closing and reopening the simulator. To further troubleshoot motion control, check the `/w200_0000/cmd_vel` topic to verify whether the joystick is publishing velocity commands.
```bash
ros2 topic echo /w200_0000/cmd_vel
```


#### Start Fast LIO
Before starting the FastLIO, wait untill the simulator is ready. Once the simulator is ready, use the following command:
```bash
ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=gazebo.yaml
```

# Data Collection for Offline Examiantion
You can collect data for offline examination. For example, you may wish to record the following data streams for later analysis:
- IMU data
- Lidar Data
- Left and right camera frames

To start recording the data, use the following command:
```bash
ros2 bag record /ground_vehicle/sensors/imu_1/data /ground_vehicle/sensors/lidar3d_0/points /ground_vehicle/sensors/camera_0/color/image /ground_vehicle/sensors/camera_1/color/image -o _warehouse
```
This will create a ros2 bag file. 

Unfortunately, the ground truth pose is not available through ROS topics, but it is published by Gazebo. You can record the ground truth pose directly from Gazebo.
```bash
gz topic -e -t /model/ground_vehicle/robot/pose > groundtruth.txt
```

In order to see other gazebo topics, use this commend:
```bash
gz topic -l
```

### Decreasing Simulation Real Time Factor for Efficient Data Collection
If you plan to collect large amounts of data, it is recommended to decrease the simulation time rate. Without adjusting the time rate, data will continue to accumulate at a fast rate, potentially causing issues with saving or processing the data effectively.

To adjust the simulation time flow, follow these steps:
1.  Navigate to the world SDF file:
    ```bash
    cd /opt/ros/humble/share/clearpath_gz/worlds/
    nano warehouse.sdf
    ```
2. Modify the **real_time_factor**
    ```xml
    <sdf version='1.7'>
    <world name='warehouse'>
        <physics type="ode">
        <max_step_size>0.003</max_step_size>
        <real_time_factor>1.01</real_time_factor>
    ```
3. Save and close. Then, restart the simulator to apply the changes.


# Additional Notes
## Testing FastLIO with Ros2 Bag

### HKU Dataset
Dowload the HKU ros2 bag from [google drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/16IUNQagundFwNg3uJFNCSdyLr9VdAxVp?usp=sharing)

1. First initialize the docker image
    ```bash
    bash GazLIO_runner.bash
    ```
2. Split the terminator terminal into 2 (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>E</kbd>).

3. In one terminator window, start FastLIO
    ```
    ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=avia.yaml
    ```

4. Run the ros2 bag from another terminal
    ```bash
    cd /PATH/TO/datasets
    ros2 bag run HKU_MB
    ```


### Clearpath Simulated Data
Dowload the simulation ros2 bags from [google drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/16IUNQagundFwNg3uJFNCSdyLr9VdAxVp?usp=sharing)

1. First initialize the docker image
    ```bash
    bash GazLIO_runner.bash
    ```

2. Split the terminator terminal into 2 (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>E</kbd>).

3. In one terminator window, start FastLIO
    ```bash
    ros2 launch fast_lio mapping.launch.py config_file:=gazebo.yaml
    ```

4. Run the ros2 bag from another terminal
    ```bash
    cd /PATH/TO/datasets
    ros2 bag run warehouse
    ```
